Module: Installing Node.js & Working with npm

Assignment Title:
Node.js Installation

Description

Install Node.js on your computer and verify that the installation is working correctly. Create a new Node.js project using npm and generate the package.json file. Students should demonstrate the basic commands required to set up a Node.js development environment.

Task Requirements

1. Install Node.js

Download and install Node.js according to your operating system.

After installation, open Terminal, Command Prompt, or PowerShell.

2. Verify Node.js Installation

Check the installed Node.js version:

node -v

The command should display the installed Node.js version.

3. Verify npm Installation

Check the npm version:

npm -v

The command should display the installed npm version.

4. Create a Node.js Project

Create a new project folder:

mkdir nodejs-project

Move into the project folder:

cd nodejs-project

5. Initialize npm

Initialize the Node.js project using:

npm init

Follow the prompts and provide the required project information.

Students may also use:

npm init -y

This automatically creates package.json with default project settings.

6. Verify package.json

After npm initialization, confirm that the project contains:

package.json

The package.json file should contain project information such as:

- Project name
- Version
- Description
- Main entry file
- Scripts
- Author
- License

7. Create a Basic Node.js File

Create a file named:

app.js

Add a simple Node.js statement:

console.log("Node.js project is working successfully.");

Run the program using:

node app.js

The terminal should display:

Node.js project is working successfully.

8. Check the Project Structure

The project should contain at least:

nodejs-project/
│
├── app.js
└── package.json

9. Submission Requirements

Students should submit:

- Screenshot showing node -v output.
- Screenshot showing npm -v output.
- Screenshot of the project folder.
- Screenshot of the package.json file.
- Screenshot showing successful execution of app.js.
- Brief explanation of the installation and npm initialization steps.
